[Amit Varma]: At a time when many of the institutions around us are being eroded, there is one that still
[Amit Varma]: commands respect, the Indian Armed Forces. At the time of independence, the British passed
[Amit Varma]: on a professional army to both India and Pakistan. But while the influence of the army was seen
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistani politics, it has remained unseen in Indian politics. And that's a damn good
[Amit Varma]: thing. The military has played an outsized role in many postcolonial nations, many of
[Amit Varma]: which have been plagued with coups and an erosion of democracy. Pakistan is both a case
[Amit Varma]: in point and a cautionary tale. The Indian Armed Forces have steadfastly remained far
[Amit Varma]: away from politics. And this is not just because of good luck, but a result of conscious decisions
[Amit Varma]: taken by our leaders through the last century. And while it's a good thing that the army
[Amit Varma]: has stayed above politics, it's not quite a good thing that politicians increasingly
[Amit Varma]: invoke the army for rhetorical purposes these days. It is also not a good thing that our
[Amit Varma]: political classes tend to take the armed forces for granted. We are lucky to have the armed
[Unknown]: forces that we do. Let's not mess it up. Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast
[Amit Varma]: on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. In this episode, we'll be talking about the Indian
[Amit Varma]: Armed Forces. And my guest is Lieutenant General Prakash Menon, who's the Director of the Strategic
[Amit Varma]: Studies Program at the Takshashila Institution in Bengaluru. General Menon has been a guest
[Amit Varma]: on the show before when we discussed nuclear strategy, a subject on which he's written
[Amit Varma]: a superb book. Both that episode and his book will be linked from the show notes. But before
[Amit Varma]: we begin our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also wants to write better? If
[Amit Varma]: so, I might have something for you. For the last couple of months, I've been teaching
[Amit Varma]: an online course called the Art of Clear Writing. Four webinars spread out over four Saturdays,
[Amit Varma]: in which I share whatever I have learned about the craft and practice of writing over 25
[Amit Varma]: years as a professional writer. The course also includes many writing exercises, discussions
[Amit Varma]: on email and WhatsApp and an interactive workshop. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150. You can check
[Amit Varma]: out the details at indiauncut.com slash clear writing. This link will be in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the
[Amit Varma]: page, then the Art of Clear Writing might be just what you need. June batches begin
[Amit Varma]: soon. So register now. indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Before we start talking about the army, both in terms of historical context and the structural
[Amit Varma]: issues that it faces and so on, tell me a little bit about yourself. Why did you join
[Amit Varma]: the army?
[Guest]: Well, I actually went to the National Defense Academy, but I did not first join the army.
[Guest]: I actually was a naval cadet because I come from a merchant navy family and my father
[Guest]: is from the 1940 batch of the Dufferin. And it was during my second term at the NDA that
[Guest]: I read a book on Field Marshal Rommel by a person called Desmond Young and was motivated
[Guest]: to join the army. So I took the decision by myself without consulting my father and he
[Guest]: was upset about it and gave an application that I want to convert my service from the
[Guest]: navy to the army. And it was the easiest thing to do because navy at that time was a very
[Guest]: small service. So it was difficult being becoming a naval cadet, but much easier moving from
[Guest]: the navy to the army. So that is how I got into the army. So I went in as a naval cadet
[Amit Varma]: came out as an army cadet.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I've realized about other government services, for example, the
[Amit Varma]: civil services, my father was an IAS officer once upon a time. And one of the things I've
[Amit Varma]: kind of realized is that back in the day, people used to enter, say, the civil services
[Amit Varma]: and so on, with a fair bit of idealism and, you know, wanting to serve the country and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And, you know, that idealism has been eroded over the decades. And today,
[Amit Varma]: when you talk about the civil services, there's a lot of cynicism, so to say. But in your
[Amit Varma]: case, in the case of the army, I'm assuming because the army is insulated from, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the regular corruptions of daily governance, I'm guessing that would not apply. Like, do
[Amit Varma]: you feel there's been a change for why people join the army over the years or?
[Guest]: Well, actually, if you want to draw a comparison, probably there has been a change. There's
[Guest]: no doubt because of the changes in the socioeconomic contours of this country itself. And therefore,
[Guest]: the background from which people join the army are probably different from what they
[Guest]: used to be in the old days. So there has been a change, no doubt. But I think as an institution,
[Guest]: the army, once you join it, has got that capacity to keep you motivated and actually bring out
[Guest]: the best in you. Because I think that is the institutional capacity because we are based
[Guest]: on what we call, and I belong to a fighting arm, I am an infantry officer, it is more
[Guest]: pertinent that we are kept in such a state of, you can say, motivation that the larger
[Guest]: and the outside world was at that time much more restricted to you. But that is not the
[Guest]: case now because we never had the social media, we never had so much of press, we never had
[Guest]: that much of exposure. So we've really lived in a very confined space. And surely the officer
[Guest]: of today does not live in that same space. He lives in a space where he's exposed to
[Guest]: the daily meanderings of India's politics, the world politics for that matter. And therefore,
[Guest]: that exposure itself would have some sort of an influence. But I think the Indian Army
[Guest]: still has that institutional capacity to make sure that the officer is still motivated and
[Guest]: directed to the right space.
[Amit Varma]: And is there also a sense that within the army, once you're part of the army, and not
[Amit Varma]: just if you're part of the army, but for your family itself, if you have a family member
[Amit Varma]: in the army, like if you're growing up as an army kid, so to say, as the phrase goes,
[Amit Varma]: that there is a sort of a separate culture of its own, which is homogenous through the
[Amit Varma]: country and which kind of influences how people within the army look at each other and which
[Amit Varma]: also insulates themselves from the larger sort of social currents around them.
[Guest]: You know, obviously, it has a different value system, which is different from obviously
[Guest]: the civilian space. But I think we must understand that the soldiers and your leadership come
[Guest]: from the same society. And therefore, they can't purely be divorced from it. And what
[Guest]: I found, at least, as India's economic growth took place, and as market forces sort of enveloped
[Guest]: daily life, the value system itself also had to be affected by it. It could not be insulated
[Guest]: from it.
[Guest]: The question always was for the military leadership, that how does it adjust to these changes while
[Guest]: it assimilates it without making sure that your military effectiveness is not impacted?
[Guest]: That was a challenge of military leadership. It will continue to be the challenge of military
[Guest]: leadership. Changes are, in fact, today, much more rapid than was it before. It will continue
[Guest]: to impact. The question is, does the military leadership recognize how those changes are
[Guest]: to be dealt with? And that becomes, I think, in today's world, much more challenging than
[Guest]: it ever was before.
[Amit Varma]: And you're one of the only two ex-army people who've come on my show, the other, of course,
[Amit Varma]: being the historian Srinath Raghavan. And so, you know, I have selection bias here.
[Amit Varma]: But within the army, you were an intellectual in the sense that, you know, you've written
[Amit Varma]: a book on nuclear strategy and so on, and you've thought very deeply. Is there a tradition
[Amit Varma]: of that within the army, within the officer class, so to say, or were you always an outlier
[Amit Varma]: and an exception? And what's the culture like there in that sense?
[Guest]: Well, I would say that at least in the early part of your upbringing, when you were actually
[Guest]: more closer, more combat soldiering, which you do, there is really no time and no space
[Guest]: for the type of intellectual activity, which you can probably indulge in after you've finished
[Guest]: your active combat life. And which means that you are a colonel, which means you finish
[Guest]: command of a unit. Then, of course, that experience, you can actually move in that space. And I
[Guest]: think there are not all, but there are quite a lot of people actually who, because of their,
[Guest]: and this is all up to the officer themselves. The institution actually gives you the opportunity,
[Guest]: but it's entirely up to the officers, whether you want to, how much you want to read, how
[Guest]: much you want to write about, how much you actually want to project and develop the idea.
[Guest]: So my particular path was driven by the fact that in 1998, India went nuclear. I was that
[Guest]: time a colonel, and I was interested to find out what meant for the armed forces and what
[Guest]: sort of, how does the role of the armed forces change because we are now a nuclear power.
[Guest]: That drove me because my thoughts were actually not in consonance with the views, which are
[Guest]: my peers and the seniors, which I had drawn. And I decided that I must find out. So that
[Guest]: is why I therefore took study leave. I did my doctorate, finally converted that into
[Guest]: a book and that's how my journey was lost. So I think it's an individual journey and
[Guest]: there are a lot of people like that.
[Amit Varma]: To sort of get back to history, you know, we often think of the Indian army as something
[Amit Varma]: that we inherited from the British and we just carried on as we were, which of course
[Amit Varma]: raises the extremely big question of why is it that essentially both India and Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: inherited essentially the similar army, similar officers trained in exactly the same way.
[Amit Varma]: But Pakistan, of course, has been beset with military dictatorships and the military has
[Amit Varma]: always been a part of their politics. And we've completely escaped that. And one interesting
[Amit Varma]: fact which I hadn't thought about before, which I got from Stephen Wilkinson's book
[Amit Varma]: on the Indian army, which will be linked from the show notes, is about how the British army
[Amit Varma]: was specifically set up for a very different purpose and what the post-colonial armies
[Amit Varma]: would have to do. The purpose of the Indian and the Pakistani armies, of course, would
[Amit Varma]: be to defend the borders and so on. You're defending the nation against external threats.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the whole point of the British army was to control the native population. And
[Amit Varma]: to this effect, they carried out what is famously known as a divide and rule policy, which applied
[Amit Varma]: to the army in the sense that they constructed a colonial Indian army. To quote Wilkinson,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the colonial Indian army was deliberately constructed both to maximize its fighting
[Amit Varma]: potential and to hedge against the threat of any repeat of a mutiny like that had almost
[Amit Varma]: ended British control in 1857. Stop quote. And what they did was they recruited within
[Amit Varma]: the army from what they considered the martial races. So there were many more Punjabis and
[Amit Varma]: Pashtuns and there was a heavy imbalance that way. And what happened after sort of colonization
[Amit Varma]: ended across the world was that in many countries, because it followed this kind of policy, you
[Amit Varma]: invariably had clashes between the army, which was controlled by minority interests against
[Amit Varma]: the majority democratic forces at large, ending in many cases as we've seen with Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: But in India, it didn't happen. You know, Nehru famously wrote to his defense minister
[Amit Varma]: in 46 or 47, where he said that this is something we must specifically watch out for. The Congress
[Amit Varma]: had been thinking about it for more than 20 years. And B. R. Ambedkar had written a book
[Amit Varma]: in 1941 called Thoughts on Pakistan, where he predicted that it was because of this compositional
[Amit Varma]: makeup that, you know, Pakistan would have trouble with this army. And we were actually
[Amit Varma]: better off letting Pakistan form because what would happen is we would get rid of a lot
[Amit Varma]: of these problems. How did that play out? Can you tell me a little bit about how the
[Guest]: army?
[Guest]: See, actually, if you look at the army, don't forget that the army was initially part of
[Guest]: the presidencies, you know, we had. So they were in different geographies. And of course,
[Guest]: the Britishers were very conscious of the fact that the loyalty of the army was absolutely
[Guest]: vital for retaining power within the country. So then that's how they devised what you described
[Guest]: as divide and rule. And then it's a very artificial construct called the martial classes. They
[Guest]: sort of put their faith in these classes and recruited more from there so that there was
[Guest]: no one particular class which would be strong enough to take over. So they actually put
[Guest]: the eggs in many baskets. That's what they did. So, you know, they even had the gurkhas
[Guest]: actually in the Indian army itself. So you could use the gurkhas against somebody else.
[Guest]: And all this came about from the lesson of 1857 is rooted there. And that's how they
[Guest]: structured the army itself. So at independence, when we lost whatever had gone to Pakistan,
[Guest]: the idea of the martial classes and they are being still in the regiments which we were,
[Guest]: actually that was not the change which was attempted. The change which Jawaharlal Nehru
[Guest]: was conscious about was of how does he make sure there is sufficient civilian control
[Guest]: on the military? And that was his focus. Because over a period of time, he saw that the military
[Guest]: had taken control. So the issue was at the heart of the civil military relationships
[Guest]: in India, that what sort of control does the civilian exercise on the military? And that's
[Guest]: where the Ministry of Defense, which was in charge and made some changes. Initially, the
[Guest]: chiefs actually were called the chiefs of staff, and they were also commanders in chief.
[Guest]: So while they were in Delhi and carrying out their staff activity, when they went to the
[Guest]: field, then they were commanders in chiefs. And without consultation of the chiefs, the
[Guest]: commanders in chiefs nomenclature was taken off. There was a big debate about it. The
[Guest]: chiefs actually protested. But finally, they were overruled and they were told to accept.
[Guest]: And Nehru made this announcement in Parliament. So Nehru's consciousness or the fact that
[Guest]: the control need to be exercised has been the main factor initially by which control
[Guest]: was exercised by the politician. And that control began to be exercised through bureaucratic
[Guest]: control. And that is where even the idea of attached offices, or that the services were
[Guest]: attached offices, were all bureaucratic constructions to ensure this control was kept. So as we
[Guest]: go on, and as we come to the present times, it is this control which has probably kept
[Guest]: India different from our neighbours and the rest of it. That is one point. And we must
[Guest]: give credit to the politicians. But I think we should also credit the institutional leadership
[Guest]: for it. Although I think just the other day, I think somebody has dug up a letter from
[Guest]: Kariyappa, I think, to the Prime Minister, saying that for some time, the army should
[Guest]: rule with the help of the President, so that the politics can, you know, there was this,
[Guest]: I don't know whether it is genuine or not, but I saw, I recently read it. But I think
[Guest]: it would probably be incorrect because this Kariyappa was supposed to have written much
[Guest]: after he has left the army, when he's a civilian, it already stood for elections and lost twice
[Guest]: and so on. So this is not something which he was thinking about when he was in service.
[Guest]: Whoever was in service and whoever the military chief were very clear, and that's, I think,
[Guest]: the institutional value, which has been passed down from independence to nowadays, that we
[Guest]: must remain an apolitical institution. I think this is a value which it is imbibed in the
[Guest]: military leaders and it is something which is endured. Of course, there will always be
[Guest]: exceptions to the rule. Somebody might say something at some point in time, but I don't
[Guest]: think you would find anybody who is wearing the uniform saying something contradictory
[Guest]: to this, it would be very difficult. It would have been said by somebody who was already
[Guest]: out of uniform. So I think there are two things here. One is the consciousness of the political
[Guest]: leaders which made sure that the control is exercised. And the other one was of the military
[Guest]: as an institution itself, which sort of embedded in itself the value of being apolitical. So
[Guest]: I think that's why both these things in combination has kept it the way it is.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's interesting that, you know, when he took over, General Kariyappa famously
[Amit Varma]: sent out a circular to the officers he commanded saying that we must stay away from politics.
[Amit Varma]: But after he retired in 1953, and again quoting from Wilkinson's book, he argued on several
[Amit Varma]: occasions for court, a suspension of civil liberties, the imposition of emergency precedence
[Amit Varma]: rule on the states, the disbanding of political parties, suspension of parliament until law
[Amit Varma]: and order had been restored, and the replacement of universal suffrage with a franchise that
[Amit Varma]: was restricted to literates. But this is all, like you said, after retirement and no serving
[Amit Varma]: officer has ever kind of said things of this sort. What was sort of really interesting
[Amit Varma]: like along with what you pointed out that a lot of the control was, you know, the Defense
[Amit Varma]: Ministry was on the ascendant and a lot of that control was taken away from the army.
[Amit Varma]: But another sort of direction that Nehru tried to move in was to change the martial composition
[Amit Varma]: of the army itself. And it's interesting that in 1949, the Indian government basically announced
[Amit Varma]: that we shall now be open to all able-bodied men from all across the country. But there
[Amit Varma]: was a caveat here, which did sort of affect the way things worked out in practice. Again,
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote Wilkinson, quote, the specific wording of the army promises and orders given
[Amit Varma]: in 1949, which stated that new infantry and artillery regiments would be open to members
[Amit Varma]: of all provinces, and that all other branches of the army would be open to members of all
[Amit Varma]: provinces had much less effect in broadening out the army than most politicians thought
[Amit Varma]: it would. This was because, as the generals knew, the infantry and armored corps had expanded
[Amit Varma]: in World War II by adding new battalions to existing class regiments, rather than through
[Amit Varma]: the logistically much more complex and uncertain step of adding whole new regiments, training
[Amit Varma]: centers, recruitment areas, and fighting traditions. Since independence, for instance, the Punjab
[Amit Varma]: regiment, which recruits mainly Sikhs and Dogras, has increased from 5 to 29 battalions,
[Amit Varma]: where the Rajputana rifles has increased from 6 to 21 battalions, because expansion has
[Amit Varma]: largely happened through the existing regiments. So now, while there is this tendency from
[Amit Varma]: within the army of sort of finding a Jugaaru way around actually changing the ethnic composition,
[Amit Varma]: you do find that, for example, one of the ways in which Nehru sort of controlled that
[Amit Varma]: was through making sure that the chief of army staff reflected far more diversity. So
[Amit Varma]: in fact, in between 49 and 79, if I remember correctly, there was only one chief of army
[Amit Varma]: staff from the so-called martial races, which is the Punjabis, which was General Thapar
[Amit Varma]: after we came to Krishnamandir and appointed him. But the rest were from sort of all over
[Amit Varma]: the place. Despite the fact that at the time of independence, the army, you know, 50% of
[Amit Varma]: the officers were Punjabis and 26% Sikhs. So it's kind of interesting that the political
[Amit Varma]: class is trying to weave the army in a particular direction. And the army itself is sort of
[Guest]: how do you view it?
[Guest]: Yeah, firstly, especially about the fact that the chiefs were chosen because of their, from
[Guest]: their regional roots. I don't think that was ever the case. And I don't think that was
[Guest]: a point of consideration. Chiefs were purely chosen, depending upon their seniority and
[Guest]: their merit and the combination of both. I don't think this issue really is true. But
[Amit Varma]: I think...
[Guest]: I mean, this is what Wilkinson says.
[Guest]: I agree. I just sort of disagree with Wilkinson on this point. But I think the other point
[Guest]: which he makes, which was about the composition of the fighting arms, which was the infantry
[Guest]: and the armoured corps. In fact, I belong to a regiment, which was the first regiment
[Guest]: raised by that time General Kariyappa, which was an all India class composition. That means
[Guest]: we could recruit anybody from any part and that we remain, therefore, the only regiment,
[Guest]: which is the fighting among these old regiments, which is all India class. The rest have continued
[Guest]: to be what they were, which means the Rajputana rifles, primarily from Rajasthan, UP, Punjabis,
[Guest]: Sikh, Sikhalai, Bihar, Madras, and so on. This is the regimental system which has refused
[Guest]: to change. And the only attempt to make this change, which is serious, was after Blue Star
[Guest]: when the Sikh regiments, some of them had mutinied. And actually, there was this study
[Guest]: which was ordered and there was major resistance from the infantry regiments themselves, because
[Guest]: the infantry leadership felt that the fact that you could have groups of men from a particular
[Guest]: geography always had strengths as far as fighting is concerned, food habits and so on. Although
[Guest]: all these beliefs have been demolished by the regiment I come from, that we get people
[Guest]: and we still have, we got enough laurels of this idea, but it has endured. It has not
[Guest]: been possible to actually have an army with the fighting arm. All the rest have changed.
[Guest]: The artillery has changed. The engineers have changed. Everybody else has nearly changed,
[Guest]: not fully, nearly changed. The infant, the fighting arms have only the new raisings,
[Guest]: whatever was used, the new battalions, they have mostly, especially outside the fighting
[Guest]: arms, mostly been based on all India class composition. So we have this anomaly. And
[Guest]: in my personal view, we should at some point in time migrate into an all India class composition.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you why I'm saying this, because I come from an all India class regiment. You
[Guest]: see, if you were in a Gurkha battalion, the Gurkha battalion will have strengths, which
[Guest]: are confined to the strength of the Gurkhas, which means they'll be good at boxing, good
[Guest]: at boxing, but they won't be good swimmers. They won't be good basketballers. Whereas
[Guest]: if you come to my regiment and my unit, you'll find that because of the all India class,
[Guest]: we have strength from across the spectrum. So the strength will always be better if you
[Guest]: have an all India class. And therefore, this idea, but you know, the orthodox infantry
[Guest]: leaders would disagree with me because they belong to that school of thought where they
[Guest]: have been brought up from a Madras regiment. The idea that a Madras regiment can actually
[Guest]: have an all India class will be anathema to the very system by which they have been grown
[Guest]: up. And not that those battalions are as good or as bad as mine, but I would think from
[Guest]: a much larger perspective, the Indian armed forces must finally all be all India class.
[Guest]: If we have to migrate, in fact, the study which I'm talking about, which was done actually
[Guest]: suggested to do that, we should do this in 30 years time. Of course, in India, if somebody
[Guest]: is suggesting to do anything in 30 years time, that means they know that it's not going to
[Guest]: be done. It was never done. So we had some experimentation and finally it was put to
[Guest]: sleep. So we have not made that change, but we should, in my point.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, just thinking aloud, I mean, the whole thinking about the martial classes
[Amit Varma]: was of course based on the very simplistic way in which the British tried to make sense
[Amit Varma]: of India when they first came. I mean, I had an episode with Manu Pillay a while back where
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about caste and, you know, Manu made the point that it's the British who made it
[Amit Varma]: fashionable to look at the entire country through the lens of the Varna system, but
[Amit Varma]: caste actually was far more complicated than that. And this whole theory of the martial
[Amit Varma]: races also seems to me a way of the British just trying to quickly categorize everything
[Amit Varma]: for the purpose of making sense of it. But it's all nonsense. But nevertheless, the fact
[Amit Varma]: is that a lot of the thinking percolates through and which leads to this sort of very amusing
[Amit Varma]: construction where there is a certain set of conventional thinkers who say that, no,
[Amit Varma]: within a battalion, you must have like the Punjabis together and the Gorkhas together
[Amit Varma]: because there'll be better integration and there'll be better fighting units because
[Amit Varma]: they'll fight better together, which as you point out is not true, but that belief nevertheless
[Amit Varma]: persists. And at the same time, there was this determination within the political classes
[Amit Varma]: that we must have an all India composition because that reduces the chances of the army
[Amit Varma]: coming together against us because you have less chance of that kind of consensus forming
[Amit Varma]: if you have diversity. And one of the compromises was that the army's infantry battalions, for
[Amit Varma]: example, were structured in these fixed class units, where, for example, you'll have the
[Amit Varma]: Punjab Regiment Battalion have two companies of Sikhs and two of Dogras and a typical JNK
[Amit Varma]: Rifles Battalion will have four different groups, Dogras, Gorkhas, Sikhs and Muslims,
[Amit Varma]: thereby also satisfying those who say that, no, you need to keep the Sikhs together and
[Amit Varma]: also ensuring some kind of diversity within the regiment. So they're not actually going
[Amit Varma]: to stand up and plot against the government, as it were.
[Guest]: You know, India is strong when we are mixed up. The more identities that we have is where
[Guest]: the problem actually is. It's not by demolishing these identities. I'm not talking about that.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about that at all. But the fact is, when we are together, then we bring
[Guest]: our individual strengths because the strength comes from the diversity, that you can have
[Guest]: different strengths in the same place because they are mixed. The example I gave you of
[Guest]: a Gorkha Battalion, or let's say you have people from Bihar and you have Adivasis there,
[Guest]: they'll be very good at hockey, but they may not be good at something else. So if you have
[Guest]: everybody mixed, you'll be strong in everybody. So the idea that we should have all India
[Guest]: class is something which has been accepted officially, but we are not able to do it because
[Guest]: entrenched beliefs and interests keep that from happening.
[Guest]: Although, let me tell you, it is now only confined to the, which is a large part, which
[Guest]: is the fighting arm with the infantry regiments. And I think some armoured corps regiments,
[Guest]: I think armoured corps also has shifted. So it still remains an infantry sort of fortress.
[Amit Varma]: But you are, of course, in an all India class, so it doesn't apply to you. But within the
[Amit Varma]: army, are there then these entrenched in-group, out-group stereotypes, like within a Sikh
[Amit Varma]: regiment, would you have an internal sense that, oh, we are better than those guys, and
[Guest]: so on?
[Guest]: So that's the point that they believe, and then this is the school of thought, that when
[Guest]: you are part of a fighting arm, you're fighting spirit, and your camaraderie comes, is more
[Guest]: stronger when you're with your own people. That's what the belief is. I'm saying that
[Guest]: I've come from an all India class regiment, and we have demolished that belief because
[Guest]: we have actually been in combat, our units have been in combat, and they have performed
[Guest]: as well as any other. So this belief itself has been disproved, but yet it endures because
[Amit Varma]: people still have that belief.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we move on, I'll quickly sum up, you know, three of the possible reasons
[Amit Varma]: that have been cited by Wilkinson for why our civil-military relations did not go the
[Amit Varma]: same way as Pakistan did. And tell me if you have something to add or elaborate upon these,
[Amit Varma]: where point one he makes is that the socio-economic strategic inheritance of Pakistan was far
[Amit Varma]: worse in 1947 compared to India, because they not only had to look after their border with
[Amit Varma]: us, they had to look after their border with Afghanistan, and they were separated from
[Amit Varma]: East Pakistan for so long. And because of this, they needed to sort of strengthen the
[Amit Varma]: army and also the ethnic makeup, the ethnic imbalance in their army was worsened. Ours
[Amit Varma]: was slightly better, but because of the flows of partition, theirs remained very Punjab
[Amit Varma]: and Pashtun dominated with practically no Bengali influence at all, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: had a huge role to play given that the majority of the population was actually in what was
[Amit Varma]: then East Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: The second factor, according to Wilkinson, is that the political institutionalization
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress party compared to the Muslim League, that it had far deeper roots, far
[Amit Varma]: greater support. So, therefore, when they set out to reform the army, you knew that
[Amit Varma]: they have the popular support and you can't sort of mess with these guys. And plus they
[Amit Varma]: were representative in terms of the ethnic and religious distribution within the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: which of course was not the case with the Muslim League in Pakistan. And third, what
[Amit Varma]: you've referred to the specific coup proofing and the balancing measures that the new Indian
[Amit Varma]: state undertook, partly because you had these decades of thinking which had gone on on how
[Amit Varma]: to control the military when we get independent, because this was something that they were
[Amit Varma]: sort of worried about. Did the China war change how people thought about the Indian military
[Amit Varma]: and how the military looked at itself? Because, you know, after the loss to China, there would
[Amit Varma]: have been the imperative to just grow the army as fast as possible.
[Guest]: China war actually was, of course, the defense minister had to resign. And it also cast a
[Guest]: shadow on the civil military relationship in terms of whether how much of interference
[Guest]: should they be by the politicians in the military affairs, especially its leadership and even
[Guest]: actually deciding them. There was no dialogue. They were told to do things which they were
[Guest]: not capable of doing because they didn't have the equipment and so on. So the main thing
[Guest]: which came out of 1962 was that there was an insufficient dialogue to actually be able
[Guest]: to, the army had to be told what to be prepared for. If he's not given the way with all to
[Guest]: flick. So it worked both ways. So the army had its own pathologies which afflicted it
[Guest]: and the politician had it. It came together in 1962. But that's probably the lowest point
[Guest]: at which we, from where we must think that we have only improved from there on. Because
[Guest]: 1962, certainly on both sides of the civil military divide, the military also was not
[Guest]: seen in a good light. And so did the politicians. So one can blame the other, but we must admit
[Guest]: that everybody was to blame because it can't be just one side that you blame and the other
[Guest]: doesn't take it. So it has to be a joint affair. So from that low point, I think, is a realization
[Guest]: that things need to change, whether it just changed fast enough or sufficiently is a matter
[Guest]: of debate. But that's the lowest point.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess at this point, you know, there are these dual imperatives. One is the imperative
[Amit Varma]: that the army has to expand massively. But the other is the political imperative, which
[Amit Varma]: is still there, which Nehru articulated that we don't want the army to get too powerful
[Amit Varma]: because we don't want a situation like in Pakistan, because these are still the young
[Amit Varma]: years of the Indian Union has been like 15 years since independence and so on. And one
[Amit Varma]: of the ways in which they kind of did this was by far more surveillance of top generals,
[Amit Varma]: like Lieutenant General S.D. Verma wrote a book in 1988, where he kind of, the book is
[Amit Varma]: called to serve with honors, where he kind of described how his telephone used to be
[Amit Varma]: tapped. And when he once went, he wanted to talk to the commanding officer, General Timaya,
[Amit Varma]: they actually, and this was in Kashmir, the two of them took a boat out in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of the Nagin Lake as it then was to make sure that they're not being overheard. And typically
[Amit Varma]: you take such precautions when you're worried about being overheard by a foreign country.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, it was sort of, you know, your political partners, so to say. So was
[Amit Varma]: this sort of an early distrust between the army and the politicians which gradually settled
[Amit Varma]: down to some kind of equilibrium?
[Guest]: I think the distrust would be a natural thing to happen because just look at the political
[Guest]: leaders at that point in time, not only in our neighborhood and even in the rest, especially
[Guest]: in Africa and so on, there were militaries which were actually taking over government.
[Guest]: So it was more the norm than anything else. So why wouldn't it have sensitized our political
[Guest]: leadership to be cautious about our own? Whether they tapped their phones, how they have kept
[Guest]: vigilance on them, I'm not aware of. But if they did, we must know that they would have
[Guest]: done it for good reason, not because they wanted to hear what the conversation was,
[Guest]: because what was at the back of their minds was the fact that this possibility existed
[Guest]: if this happened. And I think no political leadership ever should ever be complacent
[Guest]: about this, because that I think is the duty of the civilian, because the military has
[Guest]: its own way of gathering a particular type of momentum, which must be kept under control.
[Guest]: To say that the military can be autonomously do its job, and that is why this whole theory
[Guest]: of civil-military relationship is about the fact that one needs to understand the other.
[Guest]: And as far as the civilian is concerned, there must be civilian control. The complaint in
[Guest]: our case has always been that it's not civilian control, it's bureaucratic control. And that's
[Guest]: where the military has always been complaining about. But that bureaucratic control, probably
[Guest]: the bureaucracy will say was being exercised on behalf of the politicians, and the politicians
[Guest]: are actually given that. So the point at issue is, I don't think at any time, in a democracy,
[Guest]: should the civilians be complacent about, let the military have an autonomous existence,
[Guest]: and they can do what they want. I think they must always be watchful, because it is the
[Guest]: natural proclivity of the military to claim that autonomy, because they think that the
[Guest]: sphere in which they are actually is so specialized that nobody should interfere in it. Which
[Guest]: is where the contradiction is that today, we're a nuclear power. Certainly the military
[Guest]: cannot be, as one model suggests, that military will be told what to do by the politicians,
[Guest]: and the military will be given full freedom to do the way they want to. I'm afraid I don't
[Guest]: agree with that model, because everything that you do, and the type of wars that you
[Guest]: fight today, especially under a nuclear arm, has to have civilian control over it. And
[Guest]: I think the person who describes this best is Clausewitz, where he says that the rational
[Guest]: part of military affairs, once military is in action, can only be controlled by the politicians,
[Guest]: because he represents the rationality. Otherwise, military acquires a momentum of its own, which
[Guest]: is unstoppable. So the very idea that there should not be civilian control and military
[Guest]: can be autonomous, when given the job, I do not agree with that. The model which we probably
[Guest]: have, and I think Kargil is a good example of how, despite the objections of the military,
[Guest]: or not even consulting them, clearly it was laid down that you will not cross the line
[Guest]: of control. To a soldier, and purely in operational terms, it doesn't make any sense.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're saying is that those geopolitical reasons must always take precedence over military
[Guest]: reasons.
[Guest]: Of course. And the Indian politicians at that time just laid it out. I mean, they refused
[Guest]: to budge from it. So they did not even consult the military about the decision. They just
[Guest]: told them that this is our decision. And that I think is the right thing to do. Because
[Guest]: if, and especially where nuclear power today, it becomes more so, because you can't allow
[Guest]: the military to do what they want when there are nuclear weapons which can come into play.
[Guest]: So I think this idea, the main complaint has always been from the armed forces that this
[Guest]: control the armed forces accept is required, but it cannot be exercised purely in terms
[Guest]: of procedures and bureaucratic control, especially as far as defense planning is concerned. While
[Guest]: nobody intervenes in operational terms, once you're given your constraints that you can't
[Guest]: do this, but where the complaint has been mostly is that you're not sufficiently in
[Guest]: the decision making when you have to acquire, when you're to modernize, you need the type
[Guest]: of equipment for the type of threats. That's been the main complaint. It's not about how
[Guest]: wars are to be fought and so on. That is not the thing. It's about preparing for the war
[Guest]: and the wherewithal which has to be made available to it, which means these are political decisions.
[Guest]: What is the budget going to be? Where can you buy it from? All these decisions, some
[Guest]: of it, and the large, this thing has always been that instead of political control, bureaucratic
[Guest]: control has been exercised. That's been the complaint.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three sort of follow up thoughts on this. One, of course, is, I mean, it's
[Amit Varma]: very interesting to me that you should say that I obviously agree with you that you should
[Amit Varma]: say that civilian control over military is paramount. But it seems to me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: tapping of phones was kind of a crude way of doing that. Like, you know, what SD Varma
[Amit Varma]: describes in his autobiography is that after General Timaya, who was the chief of armed
[Amit Varma]: staff, he had a fight with VK Krishnamurthy and he left. And then SD Varma called him
[Amit Varma]: to commiserate. And he realized that after he had called him to commiserate, he was cut
[Amit Varma]: off by the powers that be, which basically means that they had listened to his telephone
[Amit Varma]: call, which is how he first found out about the tapping, which he later confirmed.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that it's rather than resort to crude measures, like actually surveilling
[Amit Varma]: your top army officers, it's actually far better to have rules of the game in place,
[Amit Varma]: which introduce their own safeguards, which brings me to the next question where I'd like
[Amit Varma]: you to elaborate upon what you mean by the distinction between civil control and bureaucratic
[Amit Varma]: control. That if one accepts the principle that the civilian administration should have
[Amit Varma]: control over the army, over the armed forces, then what is this distinction? I mean, they'll
[Amit Varma]: do it through bureaucrats, obviously. So what is this distinction and where is it a problem?
[Guest]: Actually, this goes to the heart of the civil military issue, that the military instrument
[Guest]: has got its peculiarities, which the military probably knows best about the instrument.
[Guest]: The civilian and the civil political leadership are actually not conversant with this instrument.
[Guest]: And that is why this instrument firstly has to be shaped to meet the needs of what the
[Guest]: politicians want, which means the politicians have to first tell the military, give the
[Guest]: political guidance to the military, that this is what we would want you to do if you have
[Guest]: to do anything, which is the political guidance which is given. The military has to translate
[Guest]: that political guidance into military terms and shape the instrument that it wants. When
[Guest]: it does that, and the military is the best thing for this translation. But firstly, therefore,
[Guest]: the military has to understand what this political guidance is. The politician has to understand
[Guest]: what sort of political guidance should be given to the military. So there has to be
[Guest]: this understanding between the two because they belong to two different worlds. The political
[Guest]: leadership is normally, unlike the military, they are short term in their outlook. And
[Guest]: also they are a contingent. They work for in terms of what is the contingencies. Whereas
[Guest]: this instrument cannot be dealt with like that. This instrument has to be dealt with
[Guest]: as a long term instrument.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me a concrete illustration of that for a layperson like me so I can understand
[Amit Varma]: it better of a, what is the political purpose, which results in a particular military instrument,
[Amit Varma]: which then can be screwed up by the short termism of the political class?
[Guest]: So suppose we have, let's say, two adversaries, one is north and one is to the west. Now it
[Guest]: is for the political leaders to tell you what sort of political objectives, if there is
[Guest]: a war, that you need to achieve as far as Pakistan is concerned. This is what you should
[Guest]: be able to achieve, or if there is a war here. Now this political objectives cannot be crystallized
[Guest]: unless there is a dialogue between the civil leadership and the military. It cannot be
[Guest]: done independently of the military itself because it requires an understanding of the
[Guest]: military instrument and the military instrument has to understand what these guys have won.
[Guest]: And this is the dialogue which will only make it possible. So then you need to have mechanisms
[Guest]: by which this dialogue is taking place.
[Guest]: One of our greatest deficiencies has been this, that there has been lack of political
[Guest]: guidance to the military itself. So in the lack of guidance, the military assumes certain
[Guest]: things and decides that we won't. Now in the military also, there are three different services.
[Guest]: So it's well possible that all the three services will think in three different ways. The Navy
[Guest]: will think about what is in the maritime arena. The Air Force will think about air power and
[Guest]: this is about land power. There's nobody who's going to put it together and that's why you
[Guest]: need structural mechanisms for this to take place. And all this came to be and realized
[Guest]: only after the Kargil war, that we need firstly political guidance. And that is why we had
[Guest]: these new institutions like the National Security Council Secretariat, where I have served.
[Guest]: But yet India still doesn't have a national security doctrine or a strategy, which is
[Guest]: the mother document from which the rest has to flow. So in the absence of that mother
[Guest]: document, there are certain assumptions, which the defense ministry itself is making, probably
[Guest]: with some guidance. And that is why they have, we have now, they have made a defense planning
[Guest]: committee with the NSA as its head, and it's actually located within the Ministry of Defense.
[Guest]: But these are all ad hoc mechanisms. They're not structures, which will probably endure
[Guest]: for long. So one of the problem has been, there is less understanding of the politicians
[Guest]: of what this military is capable and not capable of. And 1962 is a good example of when Nehru
[Guest]: said, you know, you throw them out. I mean, he gave me the same statement, throw the Chinese
[Guest]: out. He had no idea what the capability then of the armed forces were, because, you know,
[Guest]: by which time they were under recoup, they did not have the road infrastructure, although
[Guest]: enough studies were done before the 1950s, which said that we must develop this infrastructure
[Guest]: against China, but it was not done. So this, this lack of understanding of each other is
[Guest]: what is at the heart of a civil military problems. And therefore, you need a constant dialogue
[Amit Varma]: between the two.
[Amit Varma]: So the illustration that comes to mind and tell me if it works as an illustration of
[Amit Varma]: what you're describing, is in fact, the Bangladesh war, where, for example, the political objectives
[Amit Varma]: were clearly different on the two borders, whereas at first on the Bangladesh side, there
[Amit Varma]: were covert operations. And then when war actually began, the objective on the Bangladesh
[Amit Varma]: side was we go in and we do whatever it takes. But the objective on the Pakistani side was
[Amit Varma]: simply we hold the border, we are not marching to Lahore. So would this be an accurate example
[Amit Varma]: of a political objective, which then needs to be communicated to the army, so it can
[Amit Varma]: then plan accordingly. And it can go wrong if you just have bureaucrats in the defense
[Amit Varma]: ministry directing operations.
[Guest]: Yeah, I say bureaucrats, they don't direct operations. But the example that you gave,
[Guest]: in fact, let me tell you that the Indian army was not tasked to actually capture Dhaka for
[Guest]: that matter. Yeah, that happened afterwards. I have an episode with Srinath Raghav, where
[Guest]: he describes that in detail. So it happened afterwards. But 71 was one of the places where
[Guest]: there is sufficient guidance given to the armed forces. So they knew much more about
[Guest]: what they could do. Let's take another example. And that is Operation Parakram, for that matter,
[Guest]: where the guidance, what Mr. Vajpayee told the chiefs were, kuch karo, what exactly is
[Guest]: to be done, was never given to them. So all they did was to mobilize. And then they put
[Guest]: into action what they thought should be the next thing, which is to capture large parts
[Guest]: of Pakistani territory, which is the norm, which they have been used to. Because there
[Amit Varma]: was some political guidance given to that.
[Amit Varma]: So there's no interaction there between the geopolitics and the military.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, so actually, the lack of clarity of what exactly had to be achieved, is what
[Guest]: was the problem in Operation Parakram, and we know what happened. So this lesson is with
[Guest]: us, historically, and so on, in every report that we need to have. So this has been identified.
[Guest]: So that is why this Defense Planning Committee, which was in, I think, 2018, they have constituted
[Guest]: one of the tasks which is given to them, is to come out with a national security strategy.
[Guest]: It is not the case that there was no strategy before, that the National Security Advisory
[Guest]: Board or the National Security Council Secretariat was instrumental in actually getting a strategy
[Guest]: out, but it never found political acceptability. So we don't have it. I mean, so we are here,
[Guest]: which actually now getting into geopolitical, let's say, turbulence, and we still lack a
[Guest]: document, a mother document, which will guide the development of our armed forces.
[Amit Varma]: So what would this national security strategy or this mother document as it were, what would
[Amit Varma]: it then lay out? Would it sort of lay out geopolitical considerations that would limit
[Amit Varma]: and guide your military actions? Like in the instance of Parakram, for example, would it
[Amit Varma]: have laid out that yes, you can mobilize, but kindly do not invade, because we don't
[Amit Varma]: know how they will respond. And it could be nuclear. And does it embed those kinds of
[Guest]: things?
[Guest]: No, no, no, not at all. This is about the type of military instrument you want to develop.
[Guest]: What are the capabilities and the capacities that you want to have? One of the first meta
[Guest]: questions which is required to be answered, and it has to come from political guidance.
[Guest]: It has to be answered by the military, but it has to come from political guidance. What
[Guest]: is the balance between continental and maritime power that we must have? How do we strike
[Guest]: this balance? Should we put our efforts to become strong in the Indian Ocean, where we
[Guest]: have the maximum potential, utilize it? Or should we be able to capture large parts of
[Guest]: territory in Pakistan and in Tibet? These are choices that you have to make. Or do we
[Guest]: defend in the north? And do we defend in the west? And then do we actually have more capability
[Guest]: for projecting power in the oceans? These are choices, but these choices the military
[Guest]: cannot make by itself. It has to come from a political guidance. That is what I'm talking
[Guest]: about. You might call it a national security doctrine or a strategy. In the absence of
[Guest]: that document is where we are having this problem, where we have our clarity. I mean,
[Guest]: it will never be clear. We'll always actually have difficulty, because defense planning
[Guest]: essentially is about trying to see balance your resources with the type of threats that
[Guest]: you have. And the military, therefore, will have to plan not what it wants to do, what
[Guest]: it can do with the resources that is likely to be made of it. So even on that front, it
[Guest]: has not been clear as to the type of budgets you can plan out. So that is another defense
[Guest]: planning problem which has endured, has not been resolved as yet. And therefore, although
[Guest]: a defense planning committee has been announced, we are not quite clear as to where they have
[Guest]: reached and whether the situation has changed. But the essential problem still remains, which
[Guest]: is the root of the problem, which is the lack of political guidance. In the absence of the
[Guest]: political guidance, we have something which we call the defense minister's directive.
[Guest]: That's a document which the defense minister gives three services on which they can plan.
[Guest]: But the defense ministry does not have the type of expertise to, let's say, write this
[Guest]: directive. So this directive is mostly written by the military itself, goes to the defense
[Guest]: ministry, who then probably adds or minuses it and comes back to the same guys who've
[Guest]: written it. So it's something which you have devised, and it's really certainly not what
[Amit Varma]: you actually want.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, this again gets me to actually a question of economics, but not in the way
[Amit Varma]: you'd expect. We'll take a quick commercial break. And when we come back, we'll continue
[Amit Varma]: with this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to The Scene and The Unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks
[Amit Varma]: from around the world. Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every
[Amit Varma]: week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen
[Amit Varma]: to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I
[Amit Varma]: will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is Mitro Marjani by Krishna Swapti. This examination of the
[Amit Varma]: unexpressed desires and sexuality of a married woman took conservative India by storm when
[Amit Varma]: it was released in 1966. And it still sounds as fresh and relevant today in 2020. So do
[Amit Varma]: listen to it on Storytel. Mitro Marjani by Krishna Swapti. Download the Storytel app
[Amit Varma]: or visit Storytel.com. Remember, Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with General Prakash Menon about
[Amit Varma]: the Indian Army. And, you know, in all of this, you were just sort of talking about
[Amit Varma]: how if there is a national security doctrine, then that sets the parameters within which
[Amit Varma]: all the forces then have to act. Like, if you want to be a maritime power, then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the Navy needs to focus on particular things and be a particular size and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. My question to you is this, you know, that as someone who's into economics,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I look at, say, public choice theory, what public choice theory teaches
[Amit Varma]: us is that you apply the tools of economics to look at how governments function. So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I look at politicians, I look at bureaucrats, and I'll say, what are their incentives? They
[Amit Varma]: are human beings responding to a particular set of incentives. Let me carry that forward
[Amit Varma]: now into the domain of the armed forces, that I would assume that just as a bureaucrat's
[Amit Varma]: main incentives are to maximize his power and his budgets. Similarly, anybody in charge
[Amit Varma]: of, say, armored division or any kind of unit within the armed forces will want to increase
[Amit Varma]: their own power and their budgets. How do those incentives sort of play out in practice?
[Amit Varma]: Is there politicking within the armed forces to grab resources? And in the absence of a
[Amit Varma]: national security doctrine, as you said, does it then become extremely ad hoc that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which division of the armed forces can lobby the best for higher budgets? And does
[Amit Varma]: that then determine where the money goes rather than this kind of broader strategic thinking,
[Guest]: which is coming from? So, actually, as far as the within the army or the Navy or the
[Guest]: Air Force, there'll always be different elements vying for what you call scarce resources.
[Guest]: So that is natural in any case. But if that is guided by a budget and a prioritization
[Guest]: of resources based on what is your capability that you want to develop, it has nothing to
[Guest]: do with the individual parts as much as it has to do with the capability. So you have
[Guest]: actually now a system by which you identify capabilities. You have a five-year capability
[Guest]: development plan. And that capability development plan has to be firstly a military plan. Then
[Guest]: it has to be converted as far as in this military, in this plan, what is the capability the Air
[Guest]: Force needs to have? What the Navy needs to have? The army needs to have? Within the army,
[Guest]: what are the elements within the army? So it goes down like that. So you have to first
[Guest]: tackle the problem at the top, because unless you tackle the problem at the top, this thing
[Guest]: will always be there, that the guys down below will always be asking for more and trying
[Guest]: to see as to how they can get more. So that is not where the problem is. We have to tackle
[Guest]: the problem at which it is, from where it originates. And that problem is about, firstly,
[Guest]: what is the type of budget? And this is a political decision. And it's sometimes bread
[Guest]: versus butter debate. That's a political debate. How much actually of the public good are you
[Guest]: actually going to invest for national security? I mean, that's just, it's a political decision.
[Guest]: So if you look at the defense budget today, it's probably the lowest in terms of the GNP
[Guest]: since 1962. And that budget actually also been severely constrained by the fact that
[Guest]: defense pensions is also boomed. So you don't have enough money for maintaining and for
[Guest]: capital acquisitions. So we have a budgetary problem right now. Combined with this budgetary
[Guest]: problem, we have a problem of how do we prioritize depending upon, we are not very clear in terms
[Guest]: of military capacity. We might be clear in terms of service specific capacities. You
[Guest]: know, the Air Force wants to have long range bombers, the Navy wants to have submarines
[Guest]: and so on. But the fact is that all this has to be measured finally, in terms of military
[Amit Varma]: capacity.
[Amit Varma]: First, how do all these parts fit into a whole which is military capacity? And B, how does
[Amit Varma]: this military capacity then serve the nation's interests, which is the national security
[Amit Varma]: doctrine, as you say? I'll come back to cost in a moment. But tell me this, it just strikes
[Amit Varma]: me thinking aloud that there is also then a lag between geopolitical imperatives on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, and the building of military capacity towards that end on the other. You
[Amit Varma]: know, in the rapidly changing geopolitical times that we live in, things change extremely
[Amit Varma]: fast. And so a national security doctrine could presumably be revised constantly. But
[Amit Varma]: to build military capacity towards any one end must be taking a huge amount of time.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and how does that interplay?
[Guest]: Yeah, let me just let me I'm not saying that the we have a national security doctrine and
[Guest]: strategy, and that's the golden key. That's not going to be the case at all, because the
[Guest]: national security doctrine itself would probably have to be constantly updated over a period
[Guest]: of time to sort of catch up with what is a changing geopolitical situation. So this is
[Guest]: not something you do once and it's over. It's constantly flowing. But it's in essence, in
[Guest]: essence, you would have answered the mega questions, the meta questions, which you had
[Guest]: to. That will probably not change. I think we must differentiate between the use of the
[Guest]: instruments and the development of those instrumental capacities. That is an operational part, how
[Guest]: it is applied. And that is sort of the that is not where India lacks by the application
[Guest]: of those instruments. Where we are actually need for improvement is about identifying
[Guest]: the type of capacities, matching them to the political objectives, and then prioritizing
[Guest]: its development. That is where the area of improvement has to concentrate.
[Amit Varma]: And is it the case that because you have the army, the navy, the air force and so on, with
[Amit Varma]: all their, you know, their own interests to look after? Is it then the case that the armed
[Amit Varma]: forces operate in these particular silos and they're not necessarily always pushing towards
[Amit Varma]: the same end, but in a sense are almost in competition with each other?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, this is, you know, there are three different geographies. So air force
[Guest]: pilot looks at the world differently in the land. The army guy, the soldier on the ground
[Guest]: looks at it differently. And so does the navy. And that is why the consciousness about bringing
[Guest]: jointness and that's the word which is used where you need to have integrated organizations
[Guest]: which can function together and the so that you can synergize the ability of the others.
[Guest]: I mean, you, therefore, there's first requires to be an individual specific service specific
[Guest]: capacity because only the air force can operate in that geography. And so is the army. But
[Guest]: that is insufficient. We have to operate together. And today, bringing this together is what
[Guest]: is called jointness. And that is, it's normally done by integrating it within the same structures.
[Guest]: And that is why this is debate about integrated theater commands, which we don't have. And
[Guest]: right now we've got about 17 commands. Each service has got different commands, geographically
[Guest]: different located. And the good news is that the Department of Military Affairs has been
[Guest]: mandated now in the new, this thing to bring about the integrated command. So we are well
[Guest]: past the time of debate between the services. And the air force has always been an outlier
[Guest]: in this saying that we don't require these integrated commands. But that time is now
[Guest]: over because the political decision has been taken that there will be integrated commands
[Guest]: and the CDS has been mandated to make that happen. So it is that's quite a lot of progress.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about something you alluded to earlier before the break, which is about
[Amit Varma]: costs and budgets. I'll quote from a piece written by Sushant Singh in 2018, though it's
[Amit Varma]: still relevant now, where he was talking about the different vice chiefs meeting a parliamentary
[Amit Varma]: delegation. And here he quotes, quote, the army vice chief told the MPs that 68% of the
[Amit Varma]: army's equipment is vintage, and the capital budget doesn't even cater for the committed
[Amit Varma]: payments of 125 ongoing procurement deals. Leave alone provide funds to replace the vintage
[Amit Varma]: equipment. There is no budget for making emergency procurements or for providing perimeter security
[Amit Varma]: to army camps susceptible to terrorist attacks. The powers to buy ammunition and spares for
[Amit Varma]: critical stocking levels needed for 10 days of war fighting have been delegated to the
[Amit Varma]: defense services, but not enough funds have been allocated for it. On top of that, the
[Amit Varma]: army will be saddled with an additional bill of 5000 crore due to increased taxes because
[Amit Varma]: of GST. But no additional money has been made available for it. Besides paying salaries,
[Amit Varma]: there is little else that the army will be able to do with the money given by the government.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And, you know, what I often hear from people is that forget the nuclear element
[Amit Varma]: of it. If we were to fight a conventional war with Pakistan today, there is a chance
[Amit Varma]: that we would lose because of under preparedness and because a lot of our equipment is so out
[Amit Varma]: of date and so on. How true is that? I mean, should we be alarmed? Well, I think to say
[Guest]: that we would lose to Pakistan and I mean, just the size of our country and the size
[Guest]: of our armed forces itself is fundamentally defeatist and very pessimistic, I'm afraid
[Guest]: and completely disagree with that. I guess people who say this do it to make a rhetorical
[Guest]: point about. No, you don't. You don't fight. Let me tell you with money or you don't fight
[Guest]: only with the equipment. You also fight. And that is the strongest with what you call the
[Guest]: fighting spirit. So if the army itself feels and that's the point I make that you are you
[Guest]: can't fight this guy because that guy is stronger. That means you have lost it before the fight
[Amit Varma]: because that means you lost the spirit to fight. Let's assume fighting spirit is equal
[Amit Varma]: on both sides because we should also give those guys some credit. Let's assume both
[Guest]: sides have optimal fighting spirit. Yeah, but just the sheer size of the armed forces,
[Guest]: the sheer size of the Air Force and the Navy and even the armed force.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, leave aside this rhetorical point that I cited. But in general, do we have a problem
[Amit Varma]: in terms of how our equipment like Sushant pointed out more than 60% is vintage equipment?
[Amit Varma]: And do we have a problem with modernizing the armed forces?
[Guest]: Yes, that is what I know. I'm very, very aware of what the Vice Chief told the Parliamentary
[Guest]: Committee and so on. And he actually laid it bare, saying that these are all the problems
[Guest]: and he's quite right. Let's not forget that as far as budgets are concerned, this is probably
[Guest]: the lowest we have reached since 1962 war. So there is an issue with the budget. And
[Guest]: the fact that the budgets have remained where it is.
[Amit Varma]: When you say lowest, you mean as percentage of GDP?
[Guest]: As percentage of GDP, which means you can actually afford, you could afford much more
[Guest]: earlier now you're going to have much less. The point is, the equipment which we have
[Guest]: right now is being constrained, not only by budgets, which is a certainty. And as I told
[Guest]: you earlier, the defence pension is also another issue which is impinged on the budget. But
[Guest]: also our capacity to design, develop, research, and produce defence equipment of our own has
[Amit Varma]: remained practically stagnant.
[Amit Varma]: Despite all the make in India rhetoric?
[Guest]: We have had all these make in India and so on. But the fact is that we haven't moved.
[Guest]: We still remain one of the largest arms importer in the world. It is also a strategic weakness.
[Guest]: Because we have to buy from others and they can always give us stop spares if not anything
[Guest]: else in times of crisis. This is the defence industrial base of the nation has not progressed
[Guest]: to what it should be. And that remains the weakness. So we have a weakness of not being
[Guest]: able to produce our own arms to our procurement system, which means that even if we don't
[Guest]: produce, we want to buy it from outside, itself is so tedious, and so long, that it takes
[Guest]: a long time to procure it from outside, from another, let's say, off the shelf. In combination,
[Guest]: that means now you have a budget problem, which is going greater. And the fact that
[Guest]: you can't produce anything, and it takes longer time to procure it from others. This is a
[Guest]: deadly combination. So it is because of this combination that the Vice Chief of Army Staff
[Guest]: had to now tell the Parliamentary Committee, this is what is our situation, and we need
[Guest]: to do about it. And I'm sure after he made this statement, there probably was a lot of
[Guest]: things which happened. It is not that we have not ever since 1999 Kargil War, which was
[Guest]: the first major defence reform, which was attempted, studied and undertaken, and many
[Guest]: other reforms are underway. The pace is what we must question. And that's been very slow.
[Amit Varma]: What's the structural reason for that? Is it the bureaucratic nature of how decisions
[Guest]: are taken?
[Guest]: Yeah, well, actually, everybody's got to blame. You know, you have to say that this is only
[Guest]: bureaucracy. I think it's unfair on the bureaucracy. Firstly, the major change, there will always
[Guest]: be resistance to it. The only people who can get over that resistance, because there are
[Guest]: interests within the institutions, let's say DRDO, within the military itself, within the
[Guest]: bureaucracy, the only people who can get over that is actually the political leadership.
[Guest]: And I think what they have done recently, which was the creation of the CDS, and the
[Guest]: creation of the Department of Military Affairs, is something which is commendable from that
[Guest]: point of view. Now, these are two changes which were needed badly. People had actually
[Guest]: given up that this is ever going to happen. Now it's at least happened. But of course,
[Guest]: everything will depend on the human agency, which will take it forward. But at least the
[Guest]: structural reform which has been done, I think, is in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: So you refer to how Kargil for you was a realization of things that were wrong within the system,
[Amit Varma]: and that also set off various attempts to reform the armed services. Can you elaborate
[Amit Varma]: a bit on that? Like what went wrong that led to a realization of weaknesses within? What
[Amit Varma]: were those weaknesses then? And, you know, what has been attempted since?
[Guest]: You know, K Subramaniam, who actually headed the Kargil Review Committee, actually makes
[Guest]: the comment that so far, we've been generally moving along in a manner that we have been
[Guest]: lucky that we have not been badly hurt. It's time that we woke up. These are not his exact
[Guest]: words, but this is what he wrote in his report. And from that report came what is called the
[Guest]: Group of Ministers report, in which they looked at internal security, looked at intelligence,
[Guest]: looked at border management and defence. Defence was looked at by Arun Singh, the former Minister
[Guest]: of Defence. You know, he is a man who had a particular interest in defence matters.
[Guest]: And his report, the Group of Ministers on Defence, is the one which is suggested and
[Guest]: the changes which we see today, including the CDS, of course, he had not suggested the
[Guest]: department, which is an additional change, but most of the changes which we are seeing
[Guest]: today is derived from that report of Arun Singh, which deals with defence. And he identified
[Guest]: that without these structural changes, without actually changes in the budgeting process,
[Guest]: all these have been identified. The report is actually available in the public domain
[Guest]: in certain deletions which have been done for security. And we are still actually in
[Guest]: the process with the CDS, at least the main defence, this thing has finally been implemented.
[Guest]: But it has taken us 20 years to do it. That's a long time. After that, in fact, in 2012,
[Guest]: when the government of the day decided that this Cargill, this GOM report, we had to go
[Guest]: past it because, you know, there was no movement on it. That's why they had this Naresh Chandra
[Guest]: Committee report, a committee which is there. It again gave its report. It was followed
[Guest]: by another, this thing of the NDA government called the Sheketkar Committee in 2015. So
[Guest]: on in 2012, 2015, they have all made various recommendations. But the problem has always
[Guest]: been that you can easily implement recommendations which suit the institutional interests. To
[Guest]: implement others, you require political will, which must be imposed, because otherwise people
[Guest]: will either put it to the side, keep it away, delay it. And CDS actually is a very good
[Guest]: example of that, that political will has been exercised. Because even until recently, the
[Guest]: previous Air Force chief was very vehemently saying that we don't need the CDS and we don't
[Guest]: need theatre commands. So nobody was listening. Now political will is what... So I think defence
[Guest]: reform, and I'm just not talking only about higher defence organisations, even the one
[Guest]: which has not been done, which is the thing about the research and development organisation
[Guest]: or the defence production organisation, without political will, you can't make any change
[Guest]: because you see there are labour force of nearly slightly under two lakhs. They've got
[Guest]: ordinance factories, which are there. So anything which you do against this thing, they would
[Guest]: probably threaten a strike. So that is another area which the previous governments have not
[Guest]: touched and not been able to touch. And this government also has not been able to. Hopefully,
[Guest]: it should now concentrate its energy on the ministry, on the Department of Defence Production
[Guest]: and the DRDO. Because the other aspect, and not that it's not being done, is the fact
[Guest]: that we have kept, for a long period in our history, we kept the private sector out of
[Guest]: defence industry. Now, of course, that attitude has certainly changed. And today's paper itself
[Guest]: actually, you know, there's this concept of strategic partnership and there you have L&T
[Amit Varma]: and one public sector, which is the Mazagon. We're recording this on Jan 22, by the way.
[Guest]: So there is some context for the listener, because you said today's newspaper. So, the
[Guest]: Mazagon dockyard and the L&T had now been approved. And these two can now decide, team
[Guest]: up with the OEM, the original equipment manufacturer. And I think five of them have also been approved
[Guest]: from Russia, France, Germany, Spain, and I think one more country, France. So, you know,
[Guest]: this is a new model. We know that that submarine will finally come into the water after it's
[Guest]: been produced only probably slightly less than 10 years from now. But these are changes
[Guest]: which have slowly taken place. So, it is not that we are now at a standstill, we are moving,
[Guest]: but as the pace of change is what we have to question. But more than anything else,
[Guest]: this is also combined with the fact that there is certainly a dearth of budget for building
[Guest]: military capacity, or the type of capacity that you want. That there is no doubt. So,
[Guest]: what will happen is, when you don't have money, you actually will have to delay it. It will
[Guest]: cost you much more because of the delay. So, this is a political decision. So, we'll have
[Guest]: to wait and see, at least for this year's defence budget, whether there will be a change
[Guest]: in this or not. And my guess is, it's unlikely to be because the economy itself is in such
[Guest]: a state. So, this is a political decision. The fact that the public good of national
[Guest]: security will have to actually stay in a particular place. They probably will not allow it to
[Guest]: deteriorate, but I don't think they can increase this. Therefore, when you have a budget constraint,
[Guest]: and when you have constraints in your capacity, the armed forces are supposed to make that
[Guest]: up by actually devising your operational strategies, which you can afford. You cannot keep crying
[Guest]: for better equipment, better this thing. The only compensation is, then you decide to fight
[Guest]: in a particular way. And that is what you call operational genius, which will overcome
[Guest]: this lack. And that is why military leadership has a major role to play. They can't simply
[Guest]: blame and say that we don't have this, we don't have that, therefore, we can't fight.
[Guest]: The idea that technology is the determinant of victory has been disabused in modern war.
[Guest]: And I think the fact that the Americans, the most powerful nations in the world, is being
[Guest]: defeated by the Taliban, who actually just have an AK-47 or the IED, the lowest level
[Guest]: of technology, just goes to prove the point. So, you have to change your operational concept,
[Guest]: depending upon the equipment that you can afford. And you can't say that you can't fight
[Guest]: because you don't have certain things.
[Amit Varma]: This also then brings me to my next question that the decision makers, both within the
[Amit Varma]: armed forces and within government and the bureaucracy who are deciding on the future
[Amit Varma]: direction that the armed forces takes, are likely to be slightly older people in their
[Amit Varma]: 40s or 50s or 60s, and so on and so forth. But technology moves fast, military thinking
[Amit Varma]: moves very fast. Like what I am reminded of is, you, for example, mentioned the way the
[Amit Varma]: Taliban fights, where equipment is not so relevant. And I remember reading this book
[Amit Varma]: by Fred Kaplan called The Insurgents, where he talks about how within the US Army, it
[Amit Varma]: took them decades after Vietnam, to understand the potency of that kind of asymmetrical guerrilla
[Amit Varma]: warfare and how to deal with that. And they learned it so late, in fact, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they made similar mistakes even when they invaded Iraq to begin with. And one of the
[Amit Varma]: people he describes as carrying the new thinking forward was, of course, David Petraeus, who
[Amit Varma]: then took over as the general and kind of changed course to make things work better.
[Amit Varma]: But my question, therefore, is that the nature of modern warfare is changing completely.
[Amit Varma]: And the cyber warfare, there is more mechanization, there's more AI being used. How much of an
[Amit Varma]: issue is it that the decision makers who determine the future trajectory of the army may not
[Amit Varma]: be entirely up to speed with the changes that are happening in both technology and strategic
[Guest]: thinking?
[Guest]: Yeah, obviously, there will be a lag between the people who are there on the top and the
[Guest]: guys who actually understand what is the nature of the changes in technology. I mean, that
[Guest]: is for sure. The question really is, I don't have to, as a military leader, understand
[Guest]: their technology or how it works as much as what is the potential of its application.
[Guest]: There is not something I understand how it works as much as what is it to be used for.
[Guest]: That realization is what military leaders should have. And I think most militaries have
[Guest]: now actually moved to that point where their military leaders have got this technical base
[Guest]: from which will make this understanding easier. But this lag will always be there at the cutting
[Guest]: edge where it's moving too fast for people who are a little older to actually be able
[Guest]: to keep them up. So this lag, you cannot help. But that's institutionally, it has to be made
[Guest]: up. You know, the fact that somebody down below will have to take it and show it to
[Guest]: somebody else, convince him of it. And that always will be problematic because that guy
[Guest]: may not be able to understand what this chap is talking about.
[Guest]: So the point I want to make is, I am not for a moment saying that technology is not important.
[Guest]: It is important. It's very important. And therefore, what I'm saying is, you can't always
[Guest]: have cutting edge technology. That cannot be in everybody's position. But you have to
[Guest]: fight with the technology that you have. And how you fight that is where your, let's say,
[Guest]: your tactical brilliance comes about. How do you innovate? And that is where the human
[Guest]: agency makes a difference. Because all technology will depend upon how it is going to be used.
[Guest]: And that's where the human mind is much more important than the technology itself.
[Amit Varma]: My question wasn't only about technology, though, but about strategic thinking as well.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I'll, you know, ask a question in the context of the Indian Army, but in
[Amit Varma]: context of what Kaplan's book is about and what counter-insurgency thinking has been
[Amit Varma]: over the decades since David Galula wrote his classic piece on it. And the key thinking
[Amit Varma]: there is that if you want to win in a battlefield like Vietnam, or like, say, Iraq, after you
[Amit Varma]: invaded them, the way Kaplan breaks it up is he calls it 20% military, 80% political.
[Amit Varma]: The key lesson that he points out is that you can't just go in and wipe out the first
[Amit Varma]: bunch of insurgents and hold a particular piece of land if you're going to treat the
[Amit Varma]: local population like shit and turn them all against you. So what you really need to do
[Amit Varma]: is you also need to simultaneously having, you know, captured whichever city or part
[Amit Varma]: of land that you want to capture, you simultaneously have to win over the local population, provide
[Amit Varma]: them any governance that has gone missing because of your invasion, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth, which is a mistake that the Americans made when they first invaded Iraq, but that
[Guest]: they later tried to rectify.
[Guest]: The Americans have come to us for probably we would have told them this lesson because
[Amit Varma]: this is one of the oldest lessons the Indian Army has carried.
[Amit Varma]: But General Menon, not in Kashmir. The reason I would hold that we have lost Kashmir and
[Amit Varma]: just yesterday we were offline discussing David Das's book, The Generation of Rage in
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir, that what the Indian Army has actually done in Kashmir is entirely the opposite.
[Guest]: Not true at all. Not true at all. In fact, what the Indian Army has done and the doctrine
[Guest]: has said, the center of gravity is the people.
[Amit Varma]: But in practice, we have treated them so badly.
[Guest]: Not true. I completely disagree with that, that we have treated them badly. I don't think
[Guest]: that is the case at all. You know, it's a uniform, depending upon the level of insurgency,
[Guest]: the type of operations that you carried out, people will be affected. But I think the consciousness
[Guest]: that this is all about winning the loyalty of the people is ingrained into Indian Army's
[Guest]: doctrine for, I don't know, ever since we actually started using the army in the Northeast.
[Guest]: So that has not changed. And let us not forget that when you do this over a time period,
[Guest]: which we're talking about, there will be individual aberrations.
[Guest]: In some cases, there might be, for very, very short periods of time, institutional aberrations.
[Guest]: But let me tell you, as far as this issue is concerned, I think the Indian Army cannot
[Guest]: be cast in the same light that you seem to cast it in. It would be completely unfair
[Guest]: that the basic teaching, and I've served enough in Kashmir to make the point, I think we have
[Guest]: been very sensitive to how to deal with the people. And we were always conscious that
[Guest]: it is about the Kashmiris. They are the central cavity. It is their loyalty that we had to
[Guest]: win. I think Indian Army should be proud of what it has done. And let us not take those,
[Guest]: I'm not saying it's been perfect, those imperfections to say that is the norm. And I think that
[Guest]: will be very unfair.
[Amit Varma]: I'll defer to your experience there. And we can agree to disagree. And I wrote a column
[Amit Varma]: on this, which I'll link from the show notes. But again, just thinking from an economic
[Amit Varma]: point of view, we all know that people respond to incentives and power corrupts, which is
[Amit Varma]: why, you know, one of the reasons that our army hasn't meddled much in politics is because
[Amit Varma]: there are so many safeguards in place, and it doesn't have as much power as say the army
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan does. But equally, there are special conditions, for example, in Kashmir or in
[Amit Varma]: the Northeast, where the army for large periods of time does have an enormous amount of power,
[Amit Varma]: as much so if not much more than the civil administration over there, isn't it then inevitable
[Amit Varma]: that those incentives will come into play and whatever your doctrine might actually
[Amit Varma]: state, whatever the established wisdom within the army might be that treat the people well
[Amit Varma]: in the hearts of the people, that what is happening on the ground is slightly different.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I'll defer to your experience in Kashmir. And you're absolutely right, that
[Amit Varma]: is very easy to cherry pick a few things that have gone wrong and point to those as evidence
[Amit Varma]: of something larger. But it does seem to me that one of the ways in which India has failed
[Amit Varma]: is in winning the minds and hearts of Kashmiris.
[Guest]: I don't think that the army has been, army might be the object today of their, let's
[Guest]: say anger, because it's a symbol of the state. It is not because what the army has done to
[Guest]: the people. So there is a difference here. And I think this difference is very important.
[Guest]: I think for an army, which has actually spent nearly two decades continuously in a situation
[Guest]: of violence, I think the performance has been commendable. It is not perfect and I'm not
[Guest]: claiming perfection at all. But if you really look at it from the point of view of what
[Guest]: was achieved, after all, where we are now and where we were, let's say during this 20
[Guest]: years, we've been in different points in time, we've gone through ups and downs, you know.
[Guest]: But it has nothing to do with what the army has done. In fact, whenever the army, the
[Guest]: only main aim is to keep violence under controllable levels, so that the political process can
[Guest]: resolve it. What we have failed in Kashmir is not about the army's performance. It's
[Guest]: a political process that even when violence levels were down, the political process was
[Guest]: not put into effect. So I think I would not agree that the army is a cause of the problem
[Guest]: there. Definitely not the case. Army is an instrument of the state and therefore people
[Guest]: view it as a symbol of the state. So today if they're angry against the state, then obviously
[Guest]: that anger will be direct to the army. Not because what the army is doing, because it
[Guest]: is part of this state. So I think, you know, I completely disagree with what the notion
[Guest]: that you have that the army has done. In fact, the human rights violations of the army for
[Guest]: such a large force, if you really look at it in percentage terms, anywhere in the world,
[Guest]: we would still come up on top. That's a fact, just in numerical terms.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. Let's kind of move on to a topic where we would both be on the same page and
[Amit Varma]: both equally concerned, which is about the politicization of the army. Now, one of the
[Amit Varma]: refreshing things from what I can see is that so far the army in India, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, has stayed away from politics, has not been politicized. Is there a chance of that
[Amit Varma]: changing over a period of time? Is there something that gives you cause for concern?
[Guest]: Well, I think the chance of that changing can never be ruled out because anything is
[Guest]: possible from that point of view. Institutionally, the army is well, very sensitive to the fact
[Guest]: that it must maintain its political stance, culture. I think we must not take individuals
[Guest]: as symbolic of institutional change because institutional change takes a much longer period
[Guest]: of time. We might have a leader here and there who might make a political statement and then
[Guest]: you can't say that the army is getting politicized, although we must always view it as dangerous
[Guest]: signals and then it is for the institutions to make the correction. If it does not, then
[Guest]: it encourages it. So, the danger will be more as time goes on, not less, because the Indian
[Guest]: himself is getting to be more politically conscious. He's exposed social media and the
[Guest]: rest of it, the information domain itself. The soldier, the officer cadre cannot be any
[Guest]: different. So, the challenge of the institution is in that sort of milieu, how do you keep
[Guest]: the body politic of the institution away from politics itself? And there's nothing better
[Guest]: than the leadership being so conscious and not getting into or keeping away from political
[Guest]: controversies, especially making statements which are loaded politically. They might not
[Guest]: mean it, but the fact is that it's got a political load which can therefore the media can run
[Guest]: with and so on. I think there is need for this consciousness and it is not now, it is
[Guest]: always there. But today it is much more sensitive because you're actually, it's like you're
[Guest]: on the stage all the time and people are looking at you. So, it's a sports arena where the
[Guest]: game is being played and there's a whole lot of people looking at you. So, this consciousness
[Amit Varma]: definitely have to be part of the military leadership. So, what has been the level of
[Amit Varma]: autonomy that the army has to, for example, when it comes to things like the appointment
[Amit Varma]: of generals and now the appointment of the CDS? And is that a sphere where the political
[Amit Varma]: process has played a part in terms of, you know, how are generals selected and can political
[Guest]: interference make a difference, sir? Well, the system is that beyond the particular rank,
[Guest]: let's say a lieutenant generals, and let's say you want to appoint a CNC or appoint a
[Guest]: chief, then you send a panel. And from the panel, the politician actually selects. So,
[Guest]: this is therefore, and I think the system is absolutely correct. They should be able
[Guest]: to select who they want. The panel is by seniority? The panel is by seniority and eligibility
[Guest]: and obviously by seniority. You know, seniority is one issue which you can't totally discard
[Guest]: in a hierarchical organization like the military. I mean, just to go on a tangent, like in the
[Amit Varma]: IAS, what often happens is your initial rank when you're 21 and your initial rank in the
[Amit Varma]: civil services examination will basically determine the order for the rest of the career
[Amit Varma]: when you become cabinet secretary and so on, except in very rare circumstances. Is it like
[Amit Varma]: that in the army or do you constantly have evaluations as you move through the ranks?
[Guest]: It's the same. Actually, the order of your passing out from where you are, in what rank
[Guest]: have you passed out will determine your seniority and it will remain that till the time you
[Guest]: are, unless you miss a promotion board and you drop and join the next bank. So, that
[Guest]: system is the same. See, I think the politicians should be able to choose the highest ranks
[Guest]: of the military because that's a political choice. And I think the system is fair.
[Guest]: Has it always been that way?
[Guest]: It's always been that way. But the practice generally has been that you go by seniority
[Guest]: on the thing that this guy has already reached that place. All of them are good, but there's
[Guest]: nothing wrong about not keeping to that seniority. And I think this government has a lot of violated
[Guest]: the norm, changed the norm, not violated, changed the norm in the sense that there are,
[Guest]: we see now more cases where they do not always select the senior most senior.
[Guest]: Like General Raworth, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, he was actually one of the examples. And even the President Air Chief in the recent
[Guest]: instance is also the case. So, but I think that's a political choice and I think politicians
[Guest]: have the right to choose who the military leader should be. So, that's not. But the
[Guest]: politicization which you are actually referring to is whether the leadership is able to ensure
[Guest]: that the institution they command is not used for political purposes, which is meant for
[Guest]: party interests. I think that is where the differentiation is. You know, all the time,
[Guest]: the armed forces is a political instrument, is the instrument of the state, can be used
[Guest]: externally, it can be used internally. The question of politicization, which is now germane,
[Guest]: is whether it is being used to benefit the party and not the state. That is, I think,
[Guest]: where the differentiation comes. And that's when the leadership will have to take a call
[Guest]: or have a dialogue with the leaders who are actually, if they have to carry out something.
[Guest]: But that's all things which are done normally behind doors. We don't know what the type
[Guest]: of conversations which are taking place. And, you know, it might be taking place. We don't
[Guest]: know whether it's taking place or not, but it might be. So, I think we need to differentiate.
[Guest]: What we have to watch out for is this difference, that it is not being used for the benefit
[Guest]: of a party. As long as it is used for benefit of a state of the nation, it's probably okay.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a completely hypothetical example. And mind you, it's completely hypothetical.
[Amit Varma]: Let us say that there is a party in power, which puts party above the nation. And at
[Amit Varma]: a particular point in time, maybe responding to a terrorist act, they want to do something
[Amit Varma]: macho for the sake of political optics. And they give the army order that, okay, let's
[Amit Varma]: just carry out what we will call a surgical strike. But basically, you will bomb a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of trees and nobody will be hurt. But this is what we need you to do for the sake of
[Amit Varma]: optics. What is military ethics in this situation? Like, as an officer, are you therefore, as
[Amit Varma]: a general, are you therefore bound to follow the orders of your, say, the defense minister
[Amit Varma]: in this case? Or at some point, is there some point where you feel you would be duty bound
[Amit Varma]: to put your foot down? And if you put your foot down, would it be only be behind closed
[Amit Varma]: doors, after which you go ahead anyway, reluctantly? How does it all play out? I mean, and again,
[Amit Varma]: I'm thinking aloud is the first time I've thought of such a situation. So, it has to
[Amit Varma]: be a dilemma for a person within the army, which thankfully, perhaps, in our 70 something
[Amit Varma]: years, we haven't faced it. But we could face in the future, who knows?
[Guest]: I know, this is hypothetical, the exact problem of what is the legal part of this? There are
[Guest]: two issues. One is a legal issue, which you're talking about. One is an ethical issue. Legally,
[Guest]: the government is well within its rights to give the order, and they could actually justify
[Guest]: it for whatever. I mean, they don't have a say for party. That is a concealed intent.
[Amit Varma]: You can justify it for national purpose. You can always justify it for national purpose.
[Guest]: So, the legal part is not what we are talking about here. We're talking about the ethical
[Guest]: part. And the ethical part can only actually come to something through a discussion between
[Guest]: the leaders themselves. And that is why this dialogue has to be constant. That if I feel
[Guest]: something, I might, you can still overrule me. But the fact is that I should be able
[Guest]: to express and say it. Or you can actually, you can take a decision yourself, which you
[Guest]: think is the most important value that you have. But if the order is legal, the issue
[Guest]: is they can't possibly disobey it. But you know, in the real world, you can actually
[Guest]: obey orders and still disobey it. You can do so many things. So, it's all up to you.
[Guest]: But the fact is that ethical disagreements will have to be dialogued.
[Amit Varma]: Which is very complicated. Like, for example, going back to Nazi Germany, for example, which
[Amit Varma]: has no relation to present times, let me clarify. But going back to Nazi Germany, if Hitler
[Amit Varma]: gives you order to one of his generals, right, okay, this is what you have to do, you know,
[Amit Varma]: run Auschwitz for me. There's no dialogue there. It just becomes an ethical.
[Guest]: Yeah, so that's what it is. So, you as an individual, you can say that, I'm sorry,
[Guest]: I'm leaving, you find somebody else to do it. I mean, that's what military leaders have
[Amit Varma]: normally done.
[Guest]: Have done in the past.
[Guest]: If they don't ethically agree with it, they find somebody else.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I also want to sort of turn the economic lens on politics again, as I tend
[Amit Varma]: to do. And again, I'm just thinking aloud. And because I'm completely ignorant of the
[Amit Varma]: subject, I'm probably unaware of other ways of doing this that have been discussed. But
[Amit Varma]: when you're talking, for example, about the two possible systems of promotion, that one
[Amit Varma]: is as in the IAS, perhaps you just go purely by seniority, and you have a norm that the
[Amit Varma]: senior most guy gets a job. And the other might be that you put a bunch of names by
[Amit Varma]: seniority in front of a panel and the politician decides. Now, I'm thinking of the incentives
[Amit Varma]: in each case. If you go purely by seniority, and if your whole career is determined by
[Amit Varma]: how you scored in that one exam when you were 20 or 21, then the incentive for every officer
[Amit Varma]: is therefore not to try very hard to excel because it doesn't matter. Your rank determines
[Amit Varma]: where you go.
[Guest]: No, I think you got it. You got it slightly mixed up. You see, the seniority on which
[Guest]: you pass out of the academy in the IAS or the military is the seniority in your batch.
[Guest]: Every time that you have to be promoted, you have to go through a promotion board as the
[Guest]: seniority calls it. But when you get promoted, in your batch, you will still maintain that
[Guest]: seniority which you had when you entered the service. But you need to go through a board.
[Guest]: So the first guy who's number one in my batch may not even have become, let's say, a brigadier
[Guest]: because he hasn't passed the colonel to brigadier.
[Amit Varma]: So when you get promoted, you're immediately above him, right? But I'm okay, so I got this
[Amit Varma]: wrong. But this is how incentives would have worked if it was seniority alone, but it's
[Amit Varma]: not so that's sorted. But the other incentives I'm worried about is that if the politician
[Amit Varma]: makes a final call on who's going to be the general, then the incentives are towards politicization
[Amit Varma]: because then whoever the contenders are in that panel, which are put before him, their
[Amit Varma]: incentives are to be political towards the political party in charge because that increases
[Amit Varma]: the chance of becoming general. Isn't that the case? I mean, that's the way the incentives
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Guest]: So I'm just absolutely right. I mean, this is these are human systems. So what you're
[Guest]: saying is actually is this will be the natural tendency. So this is now up to the maturity
[Guest]: of the political leaders to deal with this issue. You know, do they actually want people
[Guest]: who they think are of their kind, or do they want good political leaders to lead armies
[Guest]: into battle and win? So this is a political choice. And that is where the maturity of
[Guest]: political leadership matters. So I think in after 70 years of independence, if you think
[Guest]: that this choice is still not to be left to the politicians, I think it may not be fair.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think it has to be left to the politicians. But are there other sort of systems which
[Amit Varma]: ameliorate the way the incentive structure works here?
[Guest]: No, it has to be a mix of two between merit, which is the thing, and seniority. Merit can
[Guest]: only be judged at that level. It's a matter of what the politician sees is the right guy
[Guest]: wants to command. And in a democracy, I think that is their right. They must be given the
[Guest]: choice. And unless you give the choice, how is India going to actually mature as a democracy?
[Guest]: If you're going to keep seniority as the principle of this thing, in which means you don't exercise
[Guest]: your judgment, how is this democracy going to mature? Because they might go wrong somewhere.
[Guest]: But unless you go wrong, how do you get to being right, at least mostly right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and getting mature politicians is up to the voters, which is you and me. So we
[Amit Varma]: will blame anyone else for that. So you know, I've taken so much of your time that I think
[Amit Varma]: that if you know, when you were a serving general, if someone actually took so much
[Amit Varma]: of wasted so much of your time, you would probably have court martialed them. But I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask you two final questions to end it with. One is a question on which we pretty much
[Amit Varma]: devoted an episode the last time we met. But I think for the benefit of listeners who may
[Amit Varma]: not have heard that yet, it's worth asking it again, which is how does being nuclear
[Amit Varma]: affect India's army? Because we've basically got deterrence in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it almost equalizes India and Pakistan in a sense, because either can obliterate the
[Amit Varma]: other. How does it sort of affect the role that the army plays?
[Guest]: The role that the army plays is affected because nuclear weapons actually impact on the type
[Guest]: of political objectives which you can achieve, which essentially means that this idea that
[Guest]: you can go and capture large parts of territory, let's say in Pakistan, is the one which we
[Guest]: must disabuse ourselves of, because that would require the quantum of force, which can bring
[Guest]: nuclear weapons to play. So what nuclear weapons has done is driven the armed forces to fighting
[Guest]: to a level in which only the utility of force is only where you can achieve political objectives
[Guest]: of a limited nature, not that you can subjugate the enemy by defeating him.
[Amit Varma]: We don't need to march to Lahore ever again, basically.
[Guest]: That's what it would mean. Because before nuclear weapons, you could actually have that
[Guest]: guy surrender. That's what we did. And then he will listen to your terms. Nuclear weapons,
[Guest]: especially between nuclear powers, has changed that paradigm. So the utility of force is
[Guest]: not about imposing your will as much as to affect its will. And that is where the difference
[Guest]: is. So this is actually what it has changed is the utility of force in political terms.
[Guest]: And because that has changed, it will impact how you actually fashion and apply and use
[Guest]: your armed forces. That's what has changed.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And our episode on this was very interesting. And I also had an episode on
[Amit Varma]: the nuclear dynamics between India and Pakistan with Srinath Raghavan. So that will also be
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes. My final question, which will almost seem like a cliche to my
[Amit Varma]: listeners because I ask it to all my guests in terms of whatever is the subject we're
[Amit Varma]: discussing is that when you sort of look at the state of the Indian Army and how fast
[Amit Varma]: or how slow reforms have happened and what the current thinking on it is both from within
[Amit Varma]: and from outside from the political class, looking, say, forward into the next 20 years
[Amit Varma]: where there'll be new geopolitical challenges and the whole military landscape will continue
[Amit Varma]: shifting and changing. What gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest]: I think the hope is that there is greater realization for the need for reform. The despair
[Guest]: is our inability, despite knowing what we have to do, we cannot get it done. And unless
[Guest]: we improve that, it is not that India does not know the type of reforms it wants. We
[Guest]: simply are not able to implement. And as I said, we can blame the military, we can make
[Guest]: the bureaucracy. But I think especially in the major reforms are concerned, we must hold
[Guest]: political leadership to account for that, because they are the ones which can make it
[Guest]: happen, like with CDS and the Department of Military Affairs.
[Amit Varma]: Which you feel is a big move forward.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: On that hopeful note, General Menon, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit. Always a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow General Menon on Twitter at
[Amit Varma]: PrakashMenon51. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can
[Amit Varma]: browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. Thank
[Amit Varma]: you for listening and don't fight with anyone.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.